Add a blog post introducing the IPAM controller (#182)
metal3-io/metal3-io.github.io: _posts/2020-07-06-IP_address_manager.md

---
title: "Introducing the Metal3 IP Address Manager"
date: 2020-07-06
draft: false
categories: ["metal3", "baremetal", "IPAM", "ip address manager"]
author: Maël Kimmerlin
---

As a part of developing the Cluster API Provider Metal3 (CAPM3) v1alpha4
release, the Metal3 crew introduced a new project : its own IP Address Manager.
This blog post will go through the motivations behind such a project, the
features that it brings, its use in Metal3 and the future work.

## What is the IP Address Manager ?

The IP Address Manager (IPAM) is a controller that provides IP addresses

> and manages the allocations of IP subnets. It is not a DHCP in that it only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and manages the allocations of IP subnets. It is not a DHCP server in that it only
```

Author: fixed, thanks

reconciles Kubernetes objects and does not answer to any DHCP queries. It
allocates IP addresses on request, but does not handle any use of those
addresses.

This sounds like the description of any IPAM system, no ? Well the twist
is that this manager is based on Kubernetes to specifically handle some
constraints from Metal3. We will go through the different issues that this
project tackles.

When deploying nodes in bare metal environment, there are a lot of possible
variations. This project specifically aims to solve the cases where static
IP address configurations are needed. It is designed to specifically address
this in the Cluster API (CAPI) context.

> CAPI addresses the deployment of Kubernetes clusters and nodes, using

Author: I added a link, thanks

number of machines, based on templates. The replicas can be increased by the
user, triggering the creation of new machines based on the provided templates.
This mechanism does not allow for flexibility to be able to provide static
addresses for each machine. The manager adds this flexibility by providing
the address right before provisioning the node.

In addition, all the resources from the source cluster must support the CAPI
pivoting, i.e. being copied and recreated in the target cluster. This means
that all objects must contain all needed information in their spec field to
recreate the status in the target cluster without losing information. All
objects must, through a tree of owner references, be attached to the cluster
object, for the pivoting to proceed properly.

In a nutshell, the manager provides an IP Address allocation service, based
on Kubernetes API and fulfilling the needs of Metal3, specifically the
requirements of CAPI.

## How does it work ?

The manager follows the same logic as the volume allocation in Kubernetes,
with a claim and an object created for that claim. There are three type of

> objects defined, the IPPool, the IPClaim and the IPAddress objects.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if it gets rendered differently for the web site, but normally in markdown when referring to an exact type like this, I would do:

```
the `IPPool`, the `IPClaim`, and the `IPAddress` objects.
```

Author: fixed, thanks

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.metal3.io/v1alpha1
kind: IPClaim
metadata:
  name: claim1
spec:
  pool:
    Name: pool1
status:
  address:
    Name: pool1-192-168-0-13
```

The controller will then reconcile this object and allocate an IP address. It
will create an IPAddress object representing the allocated address. It will
then update the IPPool status to list the IP Address and the IPClaim status
to point to the IPAddress.

The following is an example of an IPAddress:

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.metal3.io/v1alpha1
kind: IPAddress
metadata:
  name: pool1-192-168-0-13
spec:
  pool:
    Name: pool1
  claim:
    Name: claim1
  address: 192.168.0.13
  prefix: 24
  gateway: 192.168.0.1
```

After this allocation, the IPPool will be looking like :

```yaml
apiVersion: ipam.metal3.io/v1alpha1
kind: IPPool
metadata:
  name: pool1
spec:
  clusterName: cluster1
  pools:
    - start: 192.168.0.10
      end: 192.168.0.30
      prefix: 25
      gateway: 192.168.0.1
    - subnet: 192.168.1.1/26
    - subnet: 192.168.1.128/25
  prefix: 24
  gateway: 192.168.1.1
  preAllocations:
    claim2: 192.168.0.12
status:
  indexes:
    claim1: 192.168.0.13
    claim2: 192.168.0.12

> ```

Reviewer: Question: is IPv6 supported?  It may be worth calling out in an example if so?

Author: fixed, thanks

Author: and yes it is supported :)

## Use in Metal3

The IP Address Manager is used in Metal3 together with the metadata and network
data templates feature. Each Metal3Machine (M3M) and Metal3MachineTemplate
(M3MT) is associated with a Metal3DataTemplate that contains a metadata and /

> or a network data template that will be provided to Ironic. Those templates

Reviewer 2: It's a little confusing to talk about the templates being given to Ironic. We really give the rendered data, and Ironic doesn't know about the template or any of the k8s resources.

```suggestion
or a network data template used to create the configuration for each host. Those templates
```

Author: fixed, thanks
